
Requirements
************

Before proceeding on configuring Cuckoo, you'll need to install some
required software and libraries.


Installing Python libraries
===========================

Cuckoo host components are completely written in Python, therefore
make sure to have an appropriate version installed. For the current
release **Python 2.7** is preferred.

Install Python on Ubuntu:

   $ sudo apt-get install python

If you want to use the Django-based web interface, you'll have to
install MongoDB too:

   $ sudo apt-get install mongodb

In order to properly function, Cuckoo requires SQLAlchemy and Python
BSON to be installed.

Install with "apt-get":

   $ sudo apt-get install python-sqlalchemy python-bson

Install with "pip":

   $ sudo pip install sqlalchemy bson

There are other optional dependencies that are mostly used by modules
and utilities. The following libraries are not strictly required, but
their installation is recommended:

   * Dpkt (Highly Recommended): for extracting relevant information
     from PCAP files.

   * Jinja2 (Highly Recommended): for rendering the HTML reports and
     the web interface.

   * Magic (Optional): for identifying files' formats (otherwise use
     "file" command line utility)

   * Pydeep (Optional): for calculating ssdeep fuzzy hash of files.

   * Pymongo (Optional): for storing the results in a MongoDB
     database.

   * Yara and Yara Python (Optional): for matching Yara signatures
     (release >=3.0).

   * Libvirt (Optional): for using the KVM machine manager.

   * Bottlepy (Optional): for using the "api.py" or "web.py" utility
     (release >=0.10).

   * Django (Optional): for using the web interface (release >=1.5).

   * Pefile (Optional): used for static analysis of PE32 binaries.

   * Volatility (Optional): used for forensic analysis on memory
     (release >=2.4)

   * MAEC Python bindings (Optional): used for MAEC reporting (use a
     release >=4.0, but <4.1).

   * Chardet (Optional): used for detecting string encoding.

Some of them are already packaged in Debian/Ubuntu and can be
installed with the following command:

   $ sudo apt-get install python-dpkt python-jinja2 python-magic python-pymongo python-gridfs python-libvirt python-bottle python-pefile python-chardet

Except for *python-magic*, *python-dpkt* and *python-libvirt*, the
others can be installed through "pip" too:

   $ sudo pip install jinja2 pymongo bottle pefile django chardet

To have MAEC support, you need to first install the Cybox and then the
MAEC libraries:

   $ sudo pip install cybox==2.0.1.4
   $ sudo pip install maec==4.0.1.0

*Yara* and *Pydeep* will have to be installed manually, so please
refer to their websites.

If you want to use KVM it's packaged too and you can install it with
the following command:

   $ sudo apt-get install qemu-kvm libvirt-bin ubuntu-vm-builder bridge-utils

If you want to use XenServer you'll have to install the *XenAPI*
Python package:

   $ sudo pip install XenAPI


Virtualization Software
=======================

Despite heavily relying on VirtualBox in the past, Cuckoo has moved on
being architecturally independent from the virtualization software. As
you will see throughout this documentation, you'll be able to define
and write modules to support any software of your choice.

For the sake of this guide we will assume that you have VirtualBox
installed (which still is the default option), but this does **not**
affect anyhow the execution and general configuration of the sandbox.

You are completely responsible for the choice, configuration and
execution of your virtualization software, therefore please refrain
from asking for help on it in our channels and lists: refer to the
software's official documentation and support.

Assuming you decide to go for VirtualBox, you can get the proper
package for your distribution at the official download page. The
installation of VirtualBox is outside the scope of this documentation,
if you are not familiar with it please refer to the official
documentation.


Installing Tcpdump
==================

In order to dump the network activity performed by the malware during
execution, you'll need a network sniffer properly configured to
capture the traffic and dump it to a file.

By default Cuckoo adopts tcpdump, the prominent open source solution.

Install it on Ubuntu:

   $ sudo apt-get install tcpdump

Tcpdump requires root privileges, but since you don't want Cuckoo to
run as root you'll have to set specific Linux capabilities to the
binary:

   $ sudo setcap cap_net_raw,cap_net_admin=eip /usr/sbin/tcpdump

You can verify the results of last command with:

   $ getcap /usr/sbin/tcpdump
   /usr/sbin/tcpdump = cap_net_admin,cap_net_raw+eip

If you don't have *setcap* installed you can get it with:

   $ sudo apt-get install libcap2-bin

Or otherwise (**not recommended**) do:

   $ sudo chmod +s /usr/sbin/tcpdump

Please keep in mind that even the *setcap* method is definitely not
perfectly safe if the system has other users which are potentially
untrusted. We recommend to run Cuckoo on a dedicated system or a
trusted environment where the privileged tcpdump execution is
contained otherwise.


Installing Volatility
=====================

Volatility is an optional tool to do forensic analysis on memory
dumps. In combination with Cuckoo, it can automatically provide
additional visibility into deep modifications in the operating system
as well as detect the presence of rootkit technology that escaped the
monitoring domain of Cuckoo's analyzer.

In order to function properly, Cuckoo requires at least version 2.3 of
Volatility. You can get it from the official repository.

See the volatility documentation for detailed instructions on how to
install it.
